In Troy, there lies thescene. From isles of Greece
The princes orgulous,their high blood chafed,
Have to the port of Athenssent their ships,
Fraught with the ministersand instruments
Of cruel war: sixty andnine, that wore
Their crownets regal, fromthe Athenian bay
Put forth toward Phrygia;and their vow is made
To ransack Troy, withinwhose strong immures
The ravish'd Helen,Menelaus' queen,
With wanton Paris sleeps;and that's the quarrel.
To Tenedos they come;
And the deep-drawing barksdo there disgorge
Their warlike fraughtage:now on Dardan plains
The fresh and yetunbruised Greeks do pitch
Their brave pavilions:Priam's six-gated city,
Dardan, and Tymbria,Helias, Chetas, Troien,
And Antenorides, withmassy staples
And corresponsive andfulfilling bolts,
Sperr up the sons of Troy.
Now expectation, ticklingskittish spirits,
On one and other side,Trojan and Greek,
Sets all on hazard: andhither am I come
A prologue arm'd, but notin confidence
Of author's pen or actor'svoice, but suited
In like conditions as ourargument,
To tell you, fairbeholders, that our play
Leaps o'er the vaunt andfirstlings of those broils,
Beginning in the middle,starting thence away
To what may be digested ina play.
Like or find fault; do asyour pleasures are:
Now good or bad, 'tis butthe chance of war.
Call here my varlet; I'llunarm again:
Why should I war withoutthe walls of Troy,
That find such cruelbattle here within?
Each Trojan that is masterof his heart,
Let him to field; Troilus,alas! hath none.
Will this gear ne'er bemended?
The Greeks are strong andskilful to their strength,
Fierce to their skill and totheir fierceness valiant;
But I am weaker than awoman's tear,
Tamer than sleep, fonderthan ignorance,
Less valiant than thevirgin in the night
And skilless asunpractised infancy.
Well, I have toldyou enough of this:
for my part, I'll not meddlenor make no further.
He that will have acake out of the wheat
must needs tarrythe grinding.
Have I not tarried?
Ay, the grinding; but youmust tarry the bolting.
Ay, the bolting, but youmust tarry the leavening.
Still have I tarried.
Ay, to the leavening; buthere's yet in the word
'hereafter' the kneading,the making of the cake,
the heating of theoven and the baking;
nay, you must staythe cooling too,
or you may chanceto burn your lips.
Patience herself, whatgoddess e'er she be,
Doth lesser blench atsufferance than I do.
At Priam's royal table doI sit;
And when fair Cressidcomes into my thoughts,--
So, traitor! 'When shecomes!' When is she thence?
Well, she looked yesternightfairer than ever I saw
her look, or any womanelse.
I was about to tellthee:--when my heart,
As wedged with a sigh,would rive in twain,
Lest Hector or my fathershould perceive me,
I have, as when the sundoth light a storm,
Buried this sigh inwrinkle of a smile:
But sorrow, that is couch'din seeming gladness,
Is like that mirth fateturns to sudden sadness.
An her hair were not somewhatdarker than Helen's--
well, go to--there were no morecomparison between the women:
but, for my part, sheis my kinswoman;
I would not, as theyterm it, praise her:
but I would somebody had heardher talk yesterday, as I did.
I will not dispraise yoursister Cassandra's wit, but--
O Pandarus! I tell thee,Pandarus,--
When I do tell thee, theremy hopes lie drown'd,
Reply not in how manyfathoms deep
They lie indrench'd. Itell thee I am mad
In Cressid's love: thouanswer'st 'she is fair;'
Pour'st in the open ulcerof my heart
Her eyes, her hair, hercheek, her gait, her voice,
Handlest in thy discourse,O, that her hand,
In whose comparison allwhites are ink,
Writing their own reproach,to whose soft seizure
The cygnet's down is harshand spirit of sense
Hard as the palm of ploughman:this thou tell'st me,
As true thou tell'st me,when I say I love her;
But, saying thus, insteadof oil and balm,
Thou lay'st in every gashthat love hath given me
The knife that made it.
I speak no more thantruth.
Thou dost not speak somuch.
Faith, I'll not meddlein't. Let her be as she is:
if she be fair, 'tis the betterfor her; an she be not,
she has the mendsin her own hands.
Good Pandarus, how now,Pandarus!
I have had my labourfor my travail;
ill-thought on of her andill-thought on of you;
gone between and between, butsmall thanks for my labour.
What, art thou angry,Pandarus? what, with me?
Because she's kin to me,
therefore she's notso fair as Helen:
an she were not kin to me, shewould be as fair on Friday
as Helen is on Sunday.But what care I?
I care not an shewere a black-a-moor;
'tis all one to me.
Say I she is not fair?
I do not care whetheryou do or no.
She's a fool to stay behind herfather; let her to the Greeks;
and so I'll tell her the nexttime I see her: for my part,
I'll meddle nor make nomore i' the matter.
Pandarus,--
Not I.
Sweet Pandarus,--
Pray you, speak no more to me: Iwill leave all as I found it,
and there an end.
Peace, you ungraciousclamours! peace, rude sounds!
Fools on both sides! Helenmust needs be fair,
When with your blood youdaily paint her thus.
I cannot fight upon thisargument;
It is too starved asubject for my sword.
But Pandarus,--O gods, howdo you plague me!
I cannot come to Cressidbut by Pandar;
And he's as tetchy to bewoo'd to woo.
As she is stubborn-chasteagainst all suit.
Tell me, Apollo, for thyDaphne's love,
What Cressid is, whatPandar, and what we?
Her bed is India; thereshe lies, a pearl:
Between our Ilium andwhere she resides,
Let it be call'd the wildand wandering flood,
Ourself the merchant, andthis sailing Pandar
Our doubtful hope, ourconvoy and our bark.
How now, Prince Troilus!wherefore not afield?
Because not there: thiswoman's answer sorts,
For womanish it is to befrom thence.
What news, AEneas, fromthe field to-day?
That Paris is returnedhome and hurt.
By whom, AEneas?
Troilus, by Menelaus.
Let Paris bleed; 'tis buta scar to scorn;
Paris is gored withMenelaus' horn.
Hark, what good sport isout of town to-day!
Better at home, if 'wouldI might' were 'may.'
But to the sport abroad:are you bound thither?
In all swift haste.
Come, go we then together.
Who were those went by?
Queen Hecuba and Helen.
And whither go they?
Up to the eastern tower,
Whose height commands assubject all the vale,
To see the battle.
Hector, whose patienceIs, as a virtue, fix'd,
to-day was moved:
He chid Andromache andstruck his armourer,
And, like as there werehusbandry in war,
Before the sun rose he washarness'd light,
And to the field goes he;where every flower
Did, as a prophet, weep whatit foresaw In Hector's wrath.
What was his cause ofanger?
The noise goes, this:there is among the Greeks
A lord of Trojan blood,nephew to Hector;
They call him Ajax.
Good; and what of him?
They say he is a very manper se,
And stands alone.
So do all men, unless they aredrunk, sick, or have no legs.
This man, lady, hathrobbed many beasts
of their particular additions;he is as valiant as the lion,
churlish as the bear,slow as the elephant:
a man into whom naturehath so crowded humours
that his valour iscrushed into folly,
his folly saucedwith discretion:
there is no man hath a virtuethat he hath not a glimpse of,
nor any man an attaint but hecarries some stain of it:
he is melancholy without cause,
and merry against the hair: hehath the joints of every thing,
but everything so out of jointthat he is a gouty Briareus,
many hands and no use,
or purblind Argus, alleyes and no sight.
But how should this man,that makes me smile,
make Hector angry?
They say he yesterday copedHector in the battle
and struck him down, thedisdain and shame whereof hath
ever since kept Hectorfasting and waking.
Who comes here?
Madam, your unclePandarus.
Hector's a gallant man.
As may be in the world,lady.
What's that? what's that?
Good morrow, unclePandarus.
Good morrow, cousin Cressid:what do you talk of?
Good morrow, Alexander.How do you, cousin?
When were you at Ilium?
This morning, uncle.
What were you talkingof when I came?
Was Hector armed and goneere ye came to Ilium?
Helen was not up, was she?
Hector was gone, but Helenwas not up.
Even so: Hector wasstirring early.
That were we talking of,and of his anger.
Was he angry?
So he says here.
True, he was so: Iknow the cause too:
he'll lay about him to-day,I can tell them that:
and there's Troilus willnot come far behind him:
let them take heed of Troilus,I can tell them that too.
What, is he angry too?
Who, Troilus? Troilus isthe better man of the two.
O Jupiter! there's nocomparison.
What, not betweenTroilus and Hector?
Do you know a manif you see him?
Ay, if I ever saw himbefore and knew him.
Well, I say Troilus isTroilus.
Then you say as I say; for,I am sure, he is not Hector.
No, nor Hector is notTroilus in some degrees.
'Tis just to each of them;he is himself.
Himself! Alas, poorTroilus! I would he were.
So he is.
Condition, I had gonebarefoot to India.
He is not Hector.
Himself! no, he's not himself:would a' were himself!
Well, the gods are above;time must friend or end:
well, Troilus, well: I wouldmy heart were in her body.
No, Hector is not abetter man than Troilus.
Excuse me.
He is elder.
Pardon me, pardon me.
Th' other's not come to't; youshall tell me another tale,
when th' other's come to't.
Hector shall not havehis wit this year.
He shall not need it, ifhe have his own.
Nor his qualities.
No matter.
Nor his beauty.
'Twould not become him;his own's better.
You have no judgment, niece:
Helen herself sworeth' other day,
that fora brown favour
--for so 'tis, I must confess,--not brown neither,--
No, but brown.
'Faith, to say truth,brown and not brown.
To say the truth, true andnot true.
She praised his complexionabove Paris.
Why, Paris hath colourenough.
So he has.
Then Troilus should have toomuch: if she praised him above,
his complexion ishigher than his;
he having colour enough,and the other higher,
is too flaming a praisefor a good complexion.
I had as lief Helen'sgolden tongue
had commended Troilusfor a copper nose.
I swear to you. I think Helenloves him better than Paris.
Then she's a merry Greekindeed.
Nay, I am sure she does. Shecame to him th' other day
and puts me her whitehand to his cloven chin--
Juno have mercy! how cameit cloven?
Why, you know 'tis dimpled:I think his smiling
becomes him better thanany man in all Phrygia.
O, he smiles valiantly.
Does he not?
O yes, an 'twere a cloudin autumn.
Why, go to, then:
I cannot choose but laugh, tothink how she tickled his chin:
she has a marvellouswhite hand,
I must needs confess,--
Without the rack.
And she takes upon her to spya white hair on his chin.
Alas, poor chin! many awart is richer.
But there was such laughing!Queen Hecuba laughed
that her eyes ran o'er.
With mill-stones.
And Cassandra laughed.
Did her eyes runo'er too?
And Hector laughed.
At what was all thislaughing?
Marry, at the white hair thatHelen spied on Troilus' chin.
An't had been a green hair,I should have laughed too.
They laughed not so much at thehair as at his pretty answer.
What was his answer?
Quoth she, 'Here's but two andfifty hairs on your chin,
and one of them is white.
This is her question.
'Two and fifty hairs'quoth he, 'and one white:
that white hair is my father,and all the rest are his sons.'
'Jupiter!' quoth she, 'whichof these hairs is Paris,
my husband? 'The forkedone,' quoth he,
'pluck't out, and give it him.'
But there was such laughing!
and Helen so blushed,an Paris so chafed,
and all the rest solaughed, that it passed.
So let it now; for it hasbeen a great while going by.
Well, cousin. I told you athing yesterday; think on't.
So I do.
I'll be sworn 'tistrue; he will weep you,
an 'twere a manborn in April.
And I'll spring up in his tears,an 'twere a nettle against May.
(♪A retreat sounded by horns)
Hark! they are comingfrom the field:
shall we stand up here, and seethem as they pass toward Ilium?
good niece, do, sweetniece Cressida.
At your pleasure.
Here, here, here'san excellent place;
here we may seemost bravely:
I'll tell you them all bytheir names as they pass by;
but mark Troilusabove the rest.
Speak not so loud.
That's AEneas: is notthat a brave man?
he's one of the flowersof Troy, I can tell you:
but mark Troilus;you shall see Troilus anon.
Who's that?
That's Antenor: he has ashrewd wit, I can tell you;
and he's a mangood enough,
he's one o' the soundestjudgments in Troy whosoever,
and a proper manof person.
When comes Troilus? I'llshow you Troilus anon:
if he see me, you shallsee him nod at me.
Will he give you the nod?
You shall see.
If he do, the rich shall havemore.
(♪trumpet sounds)
That's Hector, that, that, lookyou, that; there's a fellow!
Go thy way, Hector! There'sa brave man, niece.
O brave Hector!Look how he looks!
there's a countenance!is't not a brave man?
O, a brave man!
Is a' not? it does aman's heart good.
Look you what hacksare on his helmet!
look you yonder, do yousee? look you there:
there's no jesting;there's laying on,
take't off who will, asthey say: there be hacks!
Be those with swords?
Swords! any thing, he caresnot; an the devil come to him,
it's all one: by God's lid,it does one's heart good.
Yonder comes Paris,yonder comes Paris.
Look ye yonder, niece; is'tnot a gallant man too,
is't not? Why, thisis brave now.
Who said he came hurt hometo-day? he's not hurt:
why, this will do Helen'sheart good now, ha!
Would I could see Troilus now!You shall see Troilus anon.
Who's that?
That's Helenus. I marvelwhere Troilus is.
That's Helenus. I think hewent not forth to-day.
That's Helenus. CanHelenus fight, uncle?
Helenus? no. Yes, he'llfight indifferent well.
I marvel where Troilus is.
Hark! do you not hear thepeople cry 'Troilus'?
Helenus is a priest.
What sneaking fellowcomes yonder?
Where? yonder? that'sDeiphobus. 'Tis Troilus!
there's a man, niece!Hem! Brave Troilus!
the prince of chivalry!
Peace, for shame, peace!
Mark him; note him.O brave Troilus!
Look well upon him, niece: lookyou how his sword is bloodied,
and his helm more hacked thanHector's, and how he looks,
and how he goes! Oadmirable youth!
he ne'er sawthree and twenty.
Go thy way, Troilus,go thy way!
Had I a sister were a grace,or a daughter a goddess,
he should take his choice.O admirable man! Paris?
Paris is dirt to him; and, Iwarrant, Helen, to change,
would give an eye to boot.
Here come more.
Asses, fools, dolts! chaffand bran, chaff and bran!
porridge after meat!
I could live and die i'the eyes of Troilus.
Ne'er look, ne'er look:
the eagles are gone:
crows and daws,crows and daws!
I had rather be sucha man as Troilus
than Agamemnonand all Greece.
There is among theGreeks Achilles,
a better manthan Troilus.
Achilles! a drayman, aporter, a very camel.
Well, well.
'Well, well!' why, haveyou any discretion?
have you any eyes? Doyou know what a man is?
Is not birth, beauty, goodshape, manhood, discourse,
learning, gentleness,virtue, youth, liberality,
and such like, the spiceand salt that season a man?
Ay, a minced man: and then to bebaked with no date in the pie,
for then the man's date's out.
You are such a woman! one knowsnot at what ward you lie.
Upon my back, to defendmy belly; upon my wit,
to defend my wiles;upon my secrecy,
to defend mine honesty; mymask, to defend my beauty;
and you, to defend all these:
and at all these wards Ilie, at a thousand watches.
Say one of your watches.
Nay, I'll watch you for that;
and that's one of thechiefest of them too:
if I cannot ward whatI would not have hit,
I can watch you for tellinghow I took the blow;
unless it swell past hiding,and then it's past watching.
(laughing)
You are such another!
Sir, my lord wouldinstantly speak with you.
Where?
At your own house; therehe unarms him.
Good boy, tell him I come.
I doubt he be hurt. Fareye well, good niece.
Adieu, uncle.
I'll be with you, niece,by and by.
To bring, uncle?
Ay, a token from Troilus.
By the same token, you area bawd.
Words, vows, gifts, tears,and love's full sacrifice,
He offers in another'senterprise;
But more in Troilusthousand fold I see
Than in the glass ofPandar's praise may be;
Yet hold I off. Women areangels, wooing:
Things won are done; joy'ssoul lies in the doing.
That she beloved knowsnought that knows not this:
Men prize the thingungain'd more than it is:
That she was never yetthat ever knew
Love got so sweet as whendesire did sue.
Therefore this maxim outof love I teach:
Achievement is command;ungain'd, beseech:
Then though my heart'scontent firm love doth bear,
Nothing of that shall frommine eyes appear.
Princes,
What grief hath set thejaundice on your cheeks?
The ample proposition thathope makes
In all designs begun onearth below
Fails in thepromised largeness:
cheques and disasters
Grow in the veins ofactions highest rear'd,
As knots, by the confluxof meeting sap,
Infect the sound pine anddivert his grain
Tortive and errant fromhis course of growth.
Nor, princes, is it matternew to us
That we come short of oursuppose so far
That after seven years'siege yet Troy walls stand;
Sith every action thathath gone before,
Whereof we have record,trial did draw
Bias and thwart, notanswering the aim,
And that unbodied figureof the thought
That gave't surmised shape.Why then, you princes,
Do you with cheeks abash'dbehold our works,
And call them shames? whichare indeed nought else
But the protractive trialsof great Jove
To find persistiveconstancy in men:
The fineness of whichmetal is not found
In fortune's love; forthen the bold and coward,
The wise and fool, theartist and unread,
The hard and soft, allaffined and kin:
But, in the wind andtempest of her frown,
Distinction, with a broadand powerful fan,
Puffing at all, winnowsthe light away;
And what hath mass ormatter, by itself
Lies rich in virtue andunmingled.
With due observance of thygodlike seat,
Great Agamemnon, Nestorshall apply
Thy latest words. In thereproof of chance
Lies the true proof ofmen: the sea being smooth,
How many shallow baubleboats dare sail
Upon her patient breast,making their way
With those of nobler bulk!
But let the ruffian Boreasonce enrage
The gentle Thetis, andanon behold
The strong-ribb'd barkthrough liquid mountains cut,
Bounding between the twomoist elements,
Like Perseus' horse:where's then the saucy boat
Whose weak untimber'dsides but even now
Co-rivall'd greatness?Either to harbour fled,
Or made a toast for Neptune.
Even so Doth valour's showand valour's worth divide
In storms of fortune; forin her ray and brightness
The herd hath moreannoyance by the breeze
Than by the tiger; butwhen the splitting wind
Makes flexible the kneesof knotted oaks,
And flies fled under shade,why, then the thing of courage
As roused with rage withrage doth sympathize,
And with an accent tunedin selfsame key
Retorts to chidingfortune.
Agamemnon,
Thou great commander,nerve and bone of Greece,
Heart of our numbers, souland only spirit.
In whom the tempers andthe minds of all
Should be shut up, hearwhat Ulysses speaks.
Besides the applauseand approbation
To which, most mightyfor thy place and sway,
And thou most reverend forthy stretch'd-out life
I give to both yourspeeches, which were such
As Agamemnon and the handof Greece
Should hold up high inbrass, and such again
As venerable Nestor,hatch'd in silver,
Should with a bond of air,strong as the axle-tree
On which heaven rides,knit all the Greekish ears
To his experienced tongue,yet let it please both,
Thou great, and wise, tohear Ulysses speak.
Speak, prince of Ithaca;and be't of less expect
That matter needless, ofimportless burden,
Divide thy lips, than weare confident,
When rank Thersites opeshis mastic jaws,
We shall hear music, witand oracle.
Troy, yet upon his basis,had been down,
And the great Hector'ssword had lack'd a master,
But for these instances.
The specialty of rule hathbeen neglected:
And, look, how manyGrecian tents do stand
Hollow upon this plain, somany hollow factions.
When that the general isnot like the hive
To whom the foragers shallall repair,
What honey is expected?Degree being vizarded,
The unworthiest shows asfairly in the mask.
The heavens themselves, theplanets and this centre
Observe degree, priorityand shape,
Insisture, course,proportion, season, form,
Office and custom, in allline of order;
And therefore is theglorious planet Sol
In noble eminenceenthroned and sphered
Amidst the other; whosemedicinable eye
Corrects the ill aspectsof planets evil,
And posts, like thecommandment of a king,
Sans cheque to good andbad: but when the planets
In evil mixture todisorder wander,
What plagues and whatportents! what mutiny!
What raging of the sea!shaking of earth!
Commotion in the winds!frights, horrors, changes,
Divert and crack, rend andderacinate
The unity and married calmof states
Quite from their fixure!O, when degree is shaked,
Which is the ladder to allhigh designs,
Then enterprise is sick!How could communities,
Degrees in schools andbrotherhoods in cities,
Peaceful commerce fromdividable shores,
The primogenitive and dueof birth,
Prerogative of age,crowns, sceptres, laurels,
But by degree, stand inauthentic place?
Take but degree away,untune that string,
And, hark, what discordfollows! each thing meets
In mere oppugnancy: thebounded waters
Should lift their bosomshigher than the shores
And make a sop of all thissolid globe:
Strength should be lord ofimbecility,
And the rude son shouldstrike his father dead:
Force should be right; orrather, right and wrong,
Between whose endless jarjustice resides,
Should lose their names,and so should justice too.
Then every thing includesitself in power,
Power into will, will intoappetite;
And appetite, an universalwolf,
So doubly seconded withwill and power,
Must make perforce anuniversal prey,
And last eat up himself.Great Agamemnon,
This chaos, when degree issuffocate,
Follows the choking.
And this neglection ofdegree it is
That by a pace goesbackward, with a purpose
It hath to climb. Thegeneral's disdain'd
By him one step below, heby the next,
That next by him beneath;so every step,
Exampled by the first pacethat is sick
Of his superior, grows toan envious fever
Of pale and bloodlessemulation:
And 'tis this fever thatkeeps Troy on foot,
Not her own sinews. To enda tale of length,
Troy in our weakness stands,not in her strength.
Most wisely hath Ulysseshere discover'd
The fever whereof all ourpower is sick.
The nature of the sicknessfound, Ulysses,
What is the remedy?
The great Achilles, whomopinion crowns
The sinew and the forehandof our host,
Having his ear full of hisairy fame,
Grows dainty of his worth,and in his tent
Lies mocking our designs:with him Patroclus
Upon a lazy bed thelivelong day
Breaks scurril jests;
And with ridiculous andawkward action,
Which, slanderer, heimitation calls,
He pageants us. Sometime,great Agamemnon,
Thy topless deputation heputs on,
And, like a strutting player,
whose conceit Liesin his hamstring,
and doth think it rich
To hear the woodendialogue and sound
'Twixt his stretch'd footingand the scaffoldage,--
Such to-be-pitied ando'er-wrested seeming
He acts thy greatness in:and when he speaks,
'Tis like a chime a-mending;with terms unsquared,
Which, from the tongue ofroaring Typhon dropp'd
Would seem hyperboles. Atthis fusty stuff
The large Achilles, on hispress'd bed lolling,
From his deep chest laughsout a loud applause;
Cries 'Excellent! 'tisAgamemnon right.
Now play me Nestor; hem,and stroke thy beard,
As he being drest to someoration.'
That's done, as near asthe extremest ends
Of parallels, as like asVulcan and his wife:
Yet god Achilles stillcries 'Excellent!
'Tis Nestor right. Nowplay him me, Patroclus,
Arming to answer in anight alarm.'
And then, forsooth, thefaint defects of age
Must be the scene ofmirth; to cough and spit,
And, with a palsy-fumblingon his gorget,
Shake in and out therivet: and at this sport
Sir Valour dies; cries 'O,enough, Patroclus;
Or give me ribs of steel!I shall split all
In pleasure of my spleen.'And in this fashion,
All our abilities, gifts,natures, shapes,
Severals and generals ofgrace exact,
Achievements, plots,orders, preventions,
Excitements to the field,or speech for truce,
Success or loss,what is or is not,
serves As stuff for thesetwo to make paradoxes.
And in the imitation ofthese twain--
Who, as Ulysses says,opinion crowns
With an imperialvoice--many are infect.
Ajax is grown self-will'd,and bears his head
In such a rein, in full asproud a place
As broad Achilles; keepshis tent like him;
Makes factious feasts;rails on our state of war,
Bold as an oracle, andsets Thersites,
A slave whose gall coinsslanders like a mint,
To match us in comparisonswith dirt,
To weaken and discreditour exposure,
How rank soever rounded inwith danger.
They tax our policy, andcall it cowardice,
Count wisdom as no memberof the war,
Forestall prescience, andesteem no act
But that of hand: thestill and mental parts,
That do contrive how manyhands shall strike,
When fitness calls themon, and know by measure
Of their observant toilthe enemies' weight,--
Why, this hath not afinger's dignity:
They call this bed-work,mappery, closet-war;
So that the ram thatbatters down the wall,
For the great swing andrudeness of his poise,
They place before his handthat made the engine,
Or those that with thefineness of their souls
By reason guide hisexecution.
Let this be granted, andAchilles' horse
Makes many Thetis' sons.
(♪trumpet)
What trumpet? look,Menelaus.
From Troy.
Is this great Agamemnon'stent, I pray you?
Even this.
May one, that is a heraldand a prince,
Do a fair message to hiskingly eye?
With surety stronger thanAchilles' arm
'Fore all the Greekishheads, which with one voice
Call Agamemnon head andgeneral.
Fair leave and large security.
How may A stranger tothose most imperial looks
Know them from eyes ofother mortals?
How!
Ay;
I ask, that I might wakenreverence,
And bid the cheek be readywith a blush
Modest as morning when shecoldly eyes
The youthful Phoebus:
Which is that god inoffice, guiding men?
Which is the high andmighty Agamemnon?
This Trojan scorns us; orthe men of Troy
Are ceremonious courtiers.
Courtiers as free, asdebonair, unarm'd,
As bending angels; that'stheir fame in peace:
But when they would seemsoldiers, they have galls,
Good arms, strongjoints, true swords;
and, great Jove's accord,
Nothing so full of heart.But peace, AEneas,
Peace, Trojan; lay thyfinger on thy lips!
The worthiness of praisedistains his worth,
If that the praised himselfbring the praise forth:
But what the repiningenemy commends,
That breath fame blows; thatpraise, sole pure, transcends.
Sir, you of Troy, call youyourself AEneas?
Ay, Greek, that is myname.
What's your affair I prayyou?
Sir, pardon; 'tis forAgamemnon's ears.
He hears naught privatelythat comes from Troy.
Nor I from Troy come notto whisper him:
I bring a trumpet to arousehis senses,
To set his sense on theattentive bent,
And then to speak.
Speak frankly as the wind;
It is not Agamemnon'ssleeping hour:
That thou shalt know.Trojan, he is awake,
He tells thee so himself.
Trumpet, blow loud,
Send thy brass voice throughall these lazy tents;
And every Greek of mettle,let him know,
What Troy means fairlyshall be spoke aloud.
(♪trumpet sounds)
We have, great Agamemnon,here in Troy
A prince call'd Hector,--Priamis his father,--
Who in this dull andlong-continued truce
Is rusty grown: he bade metake a trumpet,
And to this purpose speak.Kings, princes, lords!
If there be one among thefair'st of Greece
That holds his honourhigher than his ease,
That seeks his praise morethan he fears his peril,
That knows his valour, andknows not his fear,
That loves his mistressmore than in confession,
With truant vows to herown lips he loves,
And dare avow her beautyand her worth
In other arms than hers,--tohim this challenge.
Hector, in view of Trojansand of Greeks,
Shall make it good, or dohis best to do it,
He hath a lady, wiser,fairer, truer,
Than ever Greek didcompass in his arms,
And will to-morrow withhis trumpet call
Midway between your tentsand walls of Troy,
To rouse a Grecian that istrue in love:
If any come, Hector shallhonour him;
If none, he'll say in Troywhen he retires,
The Grecian dames aresunburnt and not worth
The splinter of a lance.Even so much.
This shall be told ourlovers, Lord AEneas;
If none of them have soulin such a kind,
We left them all at home:but we are soldiers;
And may that soldier amere recreant prove,
That means not, hath not,or is not in love!
If then one is, or hath,or means to be,
That one meets Hector; ifnone else, I am he.
Tell him of Nestor, onethat was a man
When Hector's grandsiresuck'd: he is old now;
But if there be not in ourGrecian host
One noble man that hathone spark of fire,
To answer for his love,tell him from me
I'll hide my silver beardin a gold beaver
And in my vantbrace putthis wither'd brawn,
And meeting him will tellhim that my lady
Was fairer than hisgrandam and as chaste
As may be in the world:his youth in flood,
I'll prove this truth withmy three drops of blood.
Now heavens forbid suchscarcity of youth!
Amen.
Fair Lord AEneas, let metouch your hand;
To our pavilion shall Ilead you, sir.
Achilles shall have wordof this intent;
So shall each lord ofGreece, from tent to tent:
Yourself shall feast withus before you go
And find the welcome of anoble foe.
Nestor!
What says Ulysses?
I have a young conceptionin my brain;
Be you my time to bring itto some shape.
What is't?
This 'tis:
Blunt wedges rive hardknots: the seeded pride
That hath to this maturityblown up
In rank Achilles must ornow be cropp'd,
Or, shedding, breed anursery of like evil,
To overbulk us all.
Well, and how?
This challenge that thegallant Hector sends,
However it is spread ingeneral name,
Relates in purpose only toAchilles.
The purpose is perspicuouseven as substance,
Whose grossness littlecharacters sum up:
And, in the publication,make no strain,
But that Achilles, werehis brain as barren
As banks of Libya,--though,Apollo knows, 'Tis dry enough,
--will, with greatspeed of judgment,
Ay, with celerity, findHector's purpose
Pointing on him.
And wake him to theanswer, think you?
Yes, 'tis most meet: whommay you else oppose,
That can from Hector bringhis honour off,
If not Achilles? Though'tbe a sportful combat,
Yet in the trial muchopinion dwells;
For here the Trojans tasteour dear'st repute
With their finest palate:and trust to me, Ulysses,
Our imputation shall beoddly poised
In this wild action; forthe success,
Although particular, shallgive a scantling
Of good or bad unto thegeneral;
And in such indexes,although small pricks
To their subsequentvolumes, there is seen
The baby figure of thegiant mass
Of things to come atlarge. It is supposed
He that meets Hectorissues from our choice
And choice, being mutualact of all our souls,
Makes merit her election,and doth boil,
As 'twere from us all, aman distill'd
Out of our virtues; whomiscarrying,
What heart receives fromhence the conquering part,
To steel a strong opinionto themselves?
Which entertain'd, limbsare his instruments,
In no less working thanare swords and bows
Directive by the limbs.
Give pardon to my speech:
Therefore 'tis meetAchilles meet not Hector.
Let us, like merchants,show our foulest wares,
And think, perchance,they'll sell; if not,
The lustre of the betteryet to show,
Shall show the better. Byshowing the worst first.
Do not consent
That ever Hector andAchilles meet;
For both our honour andour shame in this
Are dogg'd with twostrange followers.
I see them not with my oldeyes: what are they?
What glory our Achillesshares from Hector,
Were he not proud, we allshould share with him:
But he already is tooinsolent;
And we were better parchin Afric sun
Than in the pride and saltscorn of his eyes,
Should he 'scape Hectorfair:
No no, make a lottery;
And, by device, letblockish Ajax draw
The sort to fight withHector:
Give him allowance for thebetter man;
For that will physic thegreat Myrmidon
Who broils in loudapplause, and make him fall
His crest that prouderthan blue Iris bends.
If the dull brainless Ajaxcome safe off,
We'll dress him up invoices: if he fail,
Yet go we under ouropinion still
That we have better men.But, hit or miss,
Our project's life thisshape of sense assumes:
Ajax employ'd plucks downAchilles' plumes.
Now Ulysses, I begin to relishthy advice;
And I will give a taste ofit forthwith To Agamemnon:
go we to him straight.
Two curs shall tame eachother: pride alone
Must tarre the mastiffson, as 'twere their bone.